---title: "Are Funders Really Responding? Analyzing the Impact of Global Restrictions on NGOs"author:- name: Suparna Chaudhry  affiliation: Dartmouth College  email: Suparna.Chaudhry@dartmouth.edu- name: Andrew Heiss  affiliation: Duke University  email: andrew.heiss@duke.edudate: December 15, 2016reference-section-title: References...# IntroductionIn 2013, an Egyptian court imposed jail sentences on 43 NGO employees for failing to comply with the civil society organization (CSO) law, which requires that NGOs must obtain the approval of the Ministry of Social Solidarity before receiving funds from any foreign sources. Similarly, in 2014, the Indian government cancelled the licenses of over 9,000 NGOs, including prominent international groups such as the Ford Foundation and Greenpeace (Express 2015). This crackdown was initiated shortly after the government amended the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA), targeting all non-profits receiving money from foreign sources and prohibiting those whose activities were 'political' in nature. The use of such restrictive NGO legislations is not unique to the cases of Egypt and India. The last two decades have seen a proliferation such laws, resulting in an increasingly closed space for civil society. According to data from the International Center for Not-for-Profit Law, between 2004-10, more than 50 countries enacted measures restricting civil society. More broadly, between 1990-2013, 79 developing countries introduced severe barriers to entry for NGOs, and 69 countries imposed some form of funding restriction on NGOs ? whether in terms of limiting foreign funding or requiring that all money towards NGOs be channeled through government banks (Chaudhry 2016). While recent literature has examined the causes behind state crackdown on NGOs (Carothers and Brechenmacher 2014; Chaudhry 2016, Dupuy, Ron, and Prakash 2016, Heiss 2016), the consequences of this phenomenon have been relatively unexplored (Dupuy and Prakash 2016). Therefore, in this paper we ask - What is the effect of civil society restrictions on foreign aid on donors and aid patterns? Have donors reduced their funding for NGOs working on politically sensitive programming in more restrictive countries? Do trends in global philanthropy reflect donor responses to the legal repression of NGOs in the South?Understanding the impact of NGO crackdown on donors and funding agencies is vital for two main reasons. First, international donors channel a large amount of aid to developing countries via NGOs. In particular, in states with poor governance records, donors prefer non-governmental mechanisms for transferring aid (Dietrich 2013), as this avoids problems such as corruption and incompetence. In 2012, USAID spent approximately $4.3 billion on assistance to civil society around the world, with the World Bank spending approximately \$11 million on the same in 2009 (Tierney et al. 2011). By imposing restrictions such as tougher barriers to entry for foreign-funded NGOs, prohibiting the operation of foreign-funded NGOs, and the prohibition of political activities by NGOs, restrictive states may deter donors. This crackdown can consequently lead to a decline services offered to citizens in developing countries.Second, restrictive NGO legislation may also negatively impact the development of robust civic associations, which are often seen as a crucial determinant for healthy democracies (Putnam 1994). To this end, U.S. and European nations channel a large amount of democracy assistance towards civil society every year. Much of this assistance goes towards lobbying, advocacy, and mobilization around contentious areas such as human rights, elections, and political party development ? causes that are unlikely to be funded by the state. According to the International Human Rights Funders Group, in 2010, 703 foundations based in 29 countries made over 12,000 grants totaling \$1.2 billion to 6,800 organizations worldwide (Dobson, Scherer and Leon 2013). Without access to these funds, organizations in the Global South focusing on rights-based issues may cease to exist. This is due to lack of adequate domestic funding, owing to lower levels of per capita GDP and a weak local culture of philanthropy. Even for countries that have substantial wealth, a culture of charitable-giving to NGOs may not exist. For instance, over 90 per cent of human rights NGO activities in Israel are funded from Europe and America (Dupuy, Ron and Prakash 2015). Further, even when domestic philanthropists seek to provide money to NGOs, states can often coerce them to withhold their funding by threatening to not approve their business permits or withdrawing their tax exemptions. Finally, there are often differing understandings of human rights wherein people shy away from supporting causes that may be perceived as too political. Thus, a number of NGOs working in contentious issue areas may not be able to operate without financial assistance from abroad. In this article, INSERT ARGUMENT AND FINDINGSADD STRUCTURE# Foreign Aid and Civil SocietyForeign aid by Western states to developing countries ? via bilateral and multilateral mechanisms, and official development assistance ? became a booming industry starting in the 1960s. While profound criticism has been leveled against the motivations of aid agencies and the targets of these funds, foreign aid has been steadily increasing ? net official development assistance (ODA) increased by 63% during 2000-10, reaching $128.5 billion in 2010 (Lim, Mosley, and Prakash 2015). More specifically, over the last two decades, ODA to social sector programs, including civil society promotion has increased relative to foreign aid directed at economic and production sectors. Dietrich (2013) argues that donors channel money via NGOs based on their perceptions of aid achieving its intended outcome. In particular, in countries with weak institutions and poor governance, where aid transfers raise issues of misuse and bureaucratic inefficiency, donors specifically seek out NGOs for projects. Previous research has also found that directly sending funds to recipient governments can result in numerous problems - by relaxing leaders? budget constraints, it can delay reforms needed for sustainable economic growth (Easterly 2006). Direct provision of aid to governments may also promote rent-seeking among local elites (Gibson et al 2005). Thus, a large amount of Western funds and foreign aid is channeled towards NGOs in developing countries. U.S. and Western European democracy promotion agencies, and state and private donors also donate large amounts to NGOs overseas, as the strength of civic associations is often seen as a crucial determinant for healthy democracy (Putnam 2014). In most developing countries, however, the civil society empowerment strategy has focus entirely on NGOs. This is because NGOs are often viewed as visible, easy-to-reach organizations within civil society. Further, as Ottaway and Carothers (2000) point out, ?A central assumption of civil society aid carried out under the auspices of democracy promotion is that advocacy NGOs are a critical segment, perhaps the critical segment, of civil society, at least with regard to democratization. The assumption stems from the belief that the advocacy functions of those groups necessarily engages key democratic processes such as representing interests, challenging the state, and fostering citizens' participation in ways that other kinds of civil society activities do not.? Therefore, aid providers from most donors countries and democracy-promoting organizations often end up concentrating on a very narrow set of civil society organizations, namely NGOs.Despite being the preferred actor of the international community for the above-explained reasons, many states have enacted numerous restrictions against NGOs. Recent research analyzing the causes behind this crackdown has argued that in many cases, foreign funding is seen as providing resources to political opponents (Dupuy, Ron, and Prakash 2016, Carothers and Brechenmacher 2014). More broadly, Chaudhry (2016) finds that while violent crackdown is useful against NGOs posed ongoing threats, states cannot use violence against all NGOs, as doing so may reduce the state?s legitimacy, violate human rights treaties, and further mobilize the population against the regime. Therefore, in the long term, states prefer restrictive NGO legislation. This is particularly the case when NGOs challenge key economic interests of a state, influence electoral participation, or threaten mobilization. Legal restrictions obfuscate the negative consequences associated with violence and are particularly useful against intenational NGOs, as violence against them can have more dire consequences for the repressive state. Given the above advantages of using restrictive legislations over violence, such actions have been increasingly employed by states. How do restrictive NGO legislations impact the foreign aid sector, private donors, and democracy promotion community? While the determinants of giving by private donors and the democracy assistance establishment are still relatively unexplored, there are a number of studies that have looked at target country characteristics and how that determines the distribution of aid. However, results regarding door attitudes towards recipient government respect and environment for civil and political rights remain inconclusive. Svensson (1999) finds that government respect for political and civic rights has a positive impact upon whether a country receives any aid at all from Canada, Japan, and USA, but not from Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, and UK. Neumayer (2003) looking particularly at bilateral aid allocation, finds that respect for civil and political rights plays a statistically significant for almost all aid donors on whether a country is deemed eligible for receipt of aid. Further, low regulatory burden is statistically significant and substantively strong in determining level of aid for good governance. Respect for personal integrity rights is insignificant at best and exerts a positive influence on aid eligibility at worst. However, Poe (1992) and Poe et al (1994) find that U.S. aid allocation takes personal integrity rights violations into account. Thus, the foreign aid literature remains inconclusive about whether concerns about crackdown on NGOs factor into donor decisions regarding the channeling of foreign aid via non-state actors. However, Dupuy and Prakash (2016) find that the adoption of restrictive NGO finance laws is associated with a 32% decline in bilateral aid inflows in subsequent years. On the other hand, multilateral donors and overseas diaspora do not reduce aid in response to such restrictive funding legislations. While their analysis lays some necessary groundwork in understand the consequences of state repression of NGOs, their study is limited to a subset of what we analyze in this article, in that they concentrate on new laws that restrict the inflow of foreign monies to domestically operating NGOs. Below, a broader range of restrictive NGO legislations and the varied responses that funders can have to these legislations.# TheoryWhile in the 1990s and 200s, the issue of restrictive NGO legislation had not reached ubiquitous or severe proportions; this is no longer the case. The figures below show that barriers to entry, funding, and political activities have been steading increasing at a sustained pace. Further, these numbers are likely to be higher once we take consolidated democracies into account.(insert funding restrictions graph here)Further, it is becoming evidence that these laws are a result of government desire to restrict rather than simply monitor or audit NGOs (Bloodgood and Tremblay-Boire 2016). The figures below show that regulation and restriction are not necessarily mutually exclusive processes. Registration can be made mandatory for NGOs in an effort to streamline state-NGO relations, but governments may also subsequently choose to make these processes burdensome and opaque when it suits their interests. Chaudhry (2016) finds that while many states have made it mandatory for NGOs to register in their territories, very often these requirements are not straightforward. Approval times are lengthy, NGOs may not be allowed appeals in denied registration, and some countries require an unreasonable large number of founders in order to register.(insert registration graph here)Given the wide range of funders and NGOs that are affected by this global crackdown, we hypothesize that state and private donors can respond to increasingly repressive NGO legislations in two broad ways – they can either scale back their operations, or they can respond to this pushback in a number of other ways, so that indigenous civil society in developing countries is not completely bereft of external assistance. ## Scaling backIn response to the crackdown on NGOs, we first hypothesize that bilateral and multilateral donors who channel funds via NGOs to developing countries may end up reducing aid. Restrictive NGO legislations may also make the transfer of private foreign aid to NGOs in the Global South difficult. Seeing the problems faced by foreign funded NGOs in developing countries, private donors may instead decide to fund charitable causes at home instead of in other countries. Therefore, we can also expect to see a decline in such kind of transfers.> **H~1~**: In response to restrictive NGO legislation, bilateral, multilateral, and private donors may reduce their aid to the repressive countries.## Responding to the global pushbackHowever, it is unlikely to that states, inter-governmental organizations, and funding agencies will simply scale back their operations when faced with repressive legislations in target countries. In many cases, donors – both state and private – are actively working to find solutions and develop responses to help besieged local NGOs in the Global South. Further, as Carothers (2015) points out, scaling back is sometimes only visible with the actual departure of funders from the country. For instance, following the 2015 Undesirable Organizations Law, a large number of funding organizations such as the MacArthur Foundation and the National Democratic Institute were asked to leave Russia.In cases that are not as high-profile, it is more likely that we should observe subtle changes. Thus, we expect that donors should change the nature of the causes that they support and the organizations that they work with. This is because of two main reasons. First, with increasing restrictions on the nature of activities undertaken by NGOs, donors may find it difficult to find local NGOs that still work on contentious issue areas such as human rights, elections, and other kinds of rights support. Second, with increasing state rhetoric against civil society groups that threaten the security and sovereignty of the state, donors may find it more politically appropriate to increase the amount of funding for 'tame' causes such as education, health, and social service provision.> **H~2~**: As restrictive legislations against NGOs are enacted, donors start increasing funds for 'tamer' causes, and decreasing funds for politically sensitive causesFurther, due to constraints on registration, funding, and nature of activities undertaken by local NGOs, donor officials may also be more likely to turn to relevant INGOs in order to perform the same task. Previous research by Bush (2015) has shown that American donor officials actually strongly prefer American NGOs in implementing programming abroad. This is because American NGOs are easier to observe and more likely to share donors' preferences. They also mitigate potential implantation problems.> **H~3~**: As restrictive legislations against local NGOs increase, states should be more likely to provide aid to INGOs rather than local NGOsFinally, in response to draconian NGO laws, donors may instead start providing more aid to neighboring countries. For instance, following the Russian Foreign Agent law and the Undesirable Organizations Law in 2015 that led to the closure of thousands of domestic NGOs, as well as international groups such as the MacArthur Foundation, National Democratic Institute, and Human Rights, the Prague Civil Society Center has emerged as a bastion to train and coordinate civil society efforts in Russia. Thus, donors – both state and private – may believe that shifting away from having a direct presence in the country implementing restrictive laws – whether in terms of moving offices to the neighboring countries or holding training in adjacent countries, is more likely to achieve organizational goals.> **H~4~**: As restrictive legislations against NGOs in a country are enacted, donors should be more likely to provide aid to neighboring countries## Alternative explanationsFinally, an alternative strand in the foreign aid literature argues that the decision to channel money via NGOs or governments is reflective of the funder's belief in the capacity of either actor to get the job done. In countries with weak state institutions, donor expect a higher probability of aid capture and consequently want to channel more funds via NGOs (Dietrich 2013). > **H~a~**: As countries enact restrictive NGO legislations, states are unlikely to reduce funding to NGOs if the country has weak state institutions (though there are probably other ways to word/test this)# Method## VariablesControl for former colony, as long-lasting diplomatic ties between donor and aid-receiving governments may bias aid delivery in favor of government-to-government aid# Results and Analysis# ConclusionIn this article, we analyzed the impact of increasingly restrictive NGO legislation on state and private donors. We found LALALAWhile we have outlined some of the broad strategies that donors have undertaken in response to restrictive NGO legislation, these are by no means, an exhaustive list of strategies. Funders may also undertake a number of other approaches such as increasing availability of emergency funds for grantees in troubles and exploring new partnerships with international business actors (Carothers year) – strategies that are not testable in a cross-national approach. However, future qualitative work looking at these approaches can both examine a wider range of such strategies, as well as adjudicate between their effectiveness. Our findings have strong implications not just for donors, but for the operation of domestic NGOs across the Global South and the sustainability of the civil society sector in these regions as well. In order to overcome problems associated with the lack of external funding, local NGOs may now need to locate their headquarters outside their repressive states. Many organizations have also started mobilizing local resources – besides decreasing reliance on international donors, access to a sustainable stream of local resources may also allow organizations to be more responsive to community needs. However, if restrictive regulatory environments make it too hard for Northern groups and states to fund organizations in the Global South, will local philanthropy grow to fill the gap?